QUALIFICATION STEP 1: KNOWLEDGE BASE AND SUCCESS CONTRACT
2026-10-04. Specification only; stop for user review before generator implementation.

Purpose
Identify a small, solvable PLN proof task with equal-priority selectable work
whose actual expansion CPU costs might differ. A measured cost difference and
budget-dependent completion are acceptance gates, not assumptions. This is a
qualification workload, not yet the full cost-aware metareasoning benchmark.
The old machine-failure example, code, tests and results remain unchanged.
Use a separate qualification/ series to avoid confusing this new step1 with the
completed interface/proof-audit steps documented in docs/step-01.txt and step-02.txt.

1. Query and semantics
Ground query: (CanOperate unit0).
Its meaning is 'the given rules license CanOperate for unit0'. Predicate names
are labels in a synthetic authorization task, not empirical machine measurements.
The target is a valid PLN derivation from supplied axioms. We are not estimating
a hidden-world probability or requiring a single high-budget output as an oracle.

2. Exact family of inputs
Parameter N = number of alternative B certificates. Development sizes:1,4,16.
Two initial facts:
  ID1: (Ready unit0 route_a)
  ID2: (Ready unit0 route_b)
A-route implications:
  ID3: (Ready unit0 route_a) -> (Certificate unit0 path_a)
  ID4: (Certificate unit0 path_a) -> (CanOperate unit0)
For each integer i from1 through N:
  ID(2i+3): (Ready unit0 route_b) -> (Certificate unit0 path_b_i)
  ID(2i+4): (Certificate unit0 path_b_i) -> (CanOperate unit0)
Use stable symbols path_b_001,...,path_b_016, not numeric costs encoded in names.
All2N+4 input Sentence records have (stv 1.0 0.9) and a unique singleton stamp.
Thus N1 has6 records, N4 has12, N16 has36. Both starting facts are available;
the goal is not an input. Implication is the actual native PLN term constructor.

Canonical N1 KB body (specimen text, not yet an executable case file):
  (= (kb)
     ((Sentence ((Ready unit0 route_a) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (1))
      (Sentence ((Ready unit0 route_b) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (2))
      (Sentence ((Implication (Ready unit0 route_a)
                             (Certificate unit0 path_a)) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (3))
      (Sentence ((Implication (Certificate unit0 path_a)
                             (CanOperate unit0)) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (4))
      (Sentence ((Implication (Ready unit0 route_b)
                             (Certificate unit0 path_b_001)) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (5))
      (Sentence ((Implication (Certificate unit0 path_b_001)
                             (CanOperate unit0)) (stv 1.0 0.9)) (6))))

3. Native rules and expected simple proof
Use the pinned full lib_pln.metta, with no inference or selector changes. No
STV(term) marginal equations are needed by these ground modus-ponens proofs.
Do not quietly disable other native rules; capture their actual consequences.
If another rule participates in the accepted proof, explicitly support and check
it or report that proof as unsupported. Do not simply label it modus ponens.

Pinned modus-ponens formula:
  f_out = f_p*f_rule + 0.02*(1-f_p)
  c_out = f_p*f_rule*c_p*c_rule.
Each first step yields strength1/confidence0.81. Each two-step proof yields
strength1/confidence0.729 before revision, subject only to floating-point rounding.
A minimal A witness uses evidence (1 3 4).
A minimal B_i witness uses evidence (2 2i+3 2i+4), numerically sorted.
Two B proofs share ID2; the normal overlap guard must prevent their direct
revision together. A and B simple proofs have disjoint stamps and can be revised.
Any later valid revision must retain strength1 for this family; higher confidence
is not needed to satisfy the proof-completion objective.
These are formula-derived expectations, not results of a new execution.

4. What counts as success
One available Sentence for the exact ground query, with a replayable certificate
rooted in this instance's declared inputs. Verify premise/conclusion structure,
allowed rule formulas, marginal requirements if applicable, evidence disjointness
and unions, source provenance and acyclicity.
Required strength:1 within absolute tolerance1e-12.
Required confidence:at least0.729 minus1e-12, and at most1.
Do not insist on one particular evidence set: any independently checked witness
satisfying this contract qualifies, including a valid revision-supported witness.
An unsupported/unverified proof is not a success. Search progress is not a
partially correct answer. No answer within budget is 'unsolved by that budget',
not a negative proof that CanOperate is false.

The event of interest is the first qualifying goal record in the committed belief
state AFTER a complete expansion, including queue updates. A transient result
discarded during that expansion does not meet this contract. Save its certificate
at that checkpoint; later search/eviction cannot erase this historical success.
The ordinary native PLN.Query final return is separately recorded; it is not
assumed to equal the first-available answer or to implement early stopping.
An observation wrapper must preserve native selection and state transitions.
Offline replay establishes whether that recorded event qualifies. Label its time
as 'time to answer subsequently verified'; if verification is done online, charge
its cost and report that different latency explicitly.

5. Matched priority and fair initial state
Native PriorityRank is confidence. All input records therefore have priority0.9;
single-step certificate records have priority0.81. This does not mean that every
later state or record stays equally ranked. ReadyA and ReadyB can be compared
only where both are actually pending with the recorded equal native priority.
The common initial state is Tasks=Beliefs=the full ordered KB, not just two
hand-picked Ready tasks. Rule records are selectable too and can generate the
same certificates; they must not be withheld from the freely running baseline.

Predeclare three orderings per N: canonical ID order; swap only the two Ready
facts; seeded shuffle of the complete KB (seed17). Same fact/rule content and
evidence IDs in all orders. N1 is the equal-width control, not evidence of exact
timing equality. Renaming terms and varying structure belong to later transfer
tests; these9 small development cases are not9 independent task families.

6. Hypothesized cost mechanism and what can falsify it
At a matched state, ReadyA may emit one certificate; ReadyB may emit N. Both
scan the same belief buffer. Additional successful rule results, deduplication
and queue updates are the proposed source of cost variation. Record real CPU;
no delays, fabricated cost labels or guaranteed 'cheap/expensive' tags are supplied.
Keep rule/term sizes otherwise comparable. B has additional proof opportunities;
we do not claim its width differs from A only in CPU. Instead, the goal's terminal
acceptance value is matched: either route suffices. Any later factor-off/on
comparison must keep the entire KB fixed.

Qualification fails or remains unresolved if no reproducible cost gap exists,
if instrumentation dominates it, if equal-priority alternatives are unavailable,
if trivial order effects explain the result, or if first-answer timing is unchanged.
The number of generated results is an explanatory feature, not a CPU measurement.
Predicting the next expansion's cost is not estimating a whole route's remaining
cost or delayed benefit. Preserve that distinction in analysis.

7. Initial bounded correctness-run settings (for later reviewed execution)
Native maxsteps100; task and belief queue limit arguments4097 each; existing
SWI stack limit1GiB; wall safety timeout60 seconds per fresh process.
The native LimitSize keeps length STRICTLY below its argument, so4097 permits
at most4096 retained records. Record queue occupancy and any trimming when state
instrumentation is added; do not assume these generous-looking caps are inactive.
These are initial feasibility settings, NOT a calibrated CPU benchmark budget or
a guarantee of completion. If they bind before success, retain the failure and
discuss an explicit protocol revision rather than quietly enlarging the limits.
Actual total-query CPU accounting and budget calibration are later plan steps.

8. Expansion measurement contract (later implementation)
Restore the same logical state before each alternative next expansion. Record
and check the selected record, full ordered queues, evidence and configuration.
Time CPU inside the engine process from after selection to after rule execution,
result collection, deduplication and queue trimming. Separately measure selection
and total-query CPU; charge all online work in the eventual comparison.
Counters:belief-buffer size; visited premise pairs; pairs passing the stamp guard;
binary-rule attempts (both orders); generated binary/unary results; unique new
records; retained task/belief additions; removals due to caps.
Use randomized paired repetitions and multiple reachable states. If batches are
needed, restore logical state before EACH measured expansion; do not time an
evolving chain and call it repetitions of the same operation. Control warm-up
and record instrumentation/clock overhead. State restoration is a diagnostic
cost reported separately, not a free online mechanism supplied to a selector.
Numerical cost-gap acceptance margins, repetition count and CPU budgets must be
specified before that measurement batch, after timing calibration. No measured
cost, expected speedup or estimator overhead is claimed in this specification.

9. Implementation boundaries and stop point
This step adds only this specification, a declarative JSON design manifest and
README navigation. The new manifest is not yet consumed by an experiment runner.
Next reviewed step:implement generator, small cases and ground MP proof checks.
Keep existing diagnostic files, results and tests; add namespaced qualification
cases/results rather than renaming or replacing old artifacts.
Later steps:feasibility runs; state capture; expansion instrumentation; paired
profiling; budgeted baseline; criteria review. Review literature before choosing
and implementing the cost-aware adaptation. A simple fan-out/branch-count rule
must be considered as a cheap comparator in that later main comparison.
Harder expensive-but-useful cases must be validated on the baseline too, before
the final comparison; do not design them after seeing which estimator wins.

Source contract
PLN 4405956947c4b53c7ff01bd565aa3b114bc970a1; PeTTa
ae66fa8e41dcd5539d614706bd4e5cfb34f9608d. See configs/runtime.json for paths.
PLN lib_pln.metta:124-126 MP;136-143 revision;334-341 evidence overlap;
362-363 priority;369-374 queue limits;377-397 expansion;408-421 final query answer.
Specification consistency was checked against these source definitions.
No native inference, new tests or CPU measurements ran in qualification step1.

Suggested commit message (user commits)
  Specify matched-priority PLN qualification workload and success criteria
