QUALIFICATION STEP 5: SINGLE-EXPANSION CPU AND WORK INSTRUMENTATION
Completed; stop for code/results review before repeated cost profiling.

Outcome
36/36 validation trials passed in run002, with three executions each (108 total):
26 forced Ready alternatives from the 13 previously identified eligible states;
9 native selections at the midpoint of each case; and 1 separate trimming test.
For each trial, the unmodified native one-step loop, timing-only extracted
expansion and detailed audit agree on the selected record and ordered post-queues.
Timing-only and audit variants also agree on the full raw derivation list.
The nine natural midpoint transitions equal the next saved step-four state.
All counter records reconcile with saved inputs, raw results and final queues.

This validates the measurement implementation on this workload. It does not
establish a reproducible A/B cost gap, total-query benefit or estimator performance.
There is one timed expansion per condition, fixed run order and no controlled
inference warm-up. These are instrumentation checks, not an inferential benchmark.

How actual PLN computation is preserved
src/pln_cost/expansion.py extracts three expressions from the pinned native
PLN.Derive: the collapse of binary/unary rule results and the two LimitSize queue
updates. They remain verbatim in the timing-only helper. The full native library
supplies rules, truth formulas, evidence guards, deduplication and trimming.
No Python implementation substitutes for these inference operations.
Cost.Expand accepts a selected pending Sentence, performs exactly one expansion,
and returns updated Tasks, Beliefs and raw derivations. It does not recurse.
It omits the native SELECTED console print; selected-record reporting occurs
after timing. Consequently this is isolated reasoning-operation timing, not a
claim to have timed the unmodified native query with all its diagnostic output.

For native selection, the helper uses native BestCandidate and confidence ranking.
For a forced alternative, the timed/audit queues remain exactly the saved queues.
The separate unmodified reference moves only that equal-maximum-priority candidate
to the front of a task COPY so native tie-breaking chooses it, then stops after
one expansion. Beliefs are unchanged. Native queue updating removes the selected
record, preserving other task order; full resulting queues must agree exactly.
This reference trick is not an implemented selection policy, a change to the
freely running baseline, or an added online scheduling cost model.

Clock and boundaries
The existing PeTTa py-call/Janus bridge executes Python time.process_time_ns()
inside the SWI process. This process-wide clock includes user and system CPU,
excludes sleep time, and returns integer nanoseconds. Nanosecond representation
and nominal clock resolution do not imply nanosecond measurement accuracy.
Official semantics: https://docs.python.org/3/library/time.html#time.process_time
Pinned bridge: PeTTa src/metta.pl:236-261; use_module(library(janus)) at line10.
SWI statistics(process_cputime) is documented as user CPU only, so it was not used
as a substitute for user+system CPU:
https://www.swi-prolog.org/pldoc/man?section=builtin-statistics

Boundary 1: clock before selection/forced-candidate dispatch.
Boundary 2: clock immediately after selection/dispatch, before Cost.Expand.
Boundary 3: clock after raw-result collection AND both queue updates complete.
Report fields:
- selection_or_dispatch_cpu_ns: boundary2 - boundary1. In forced trials this is
  candidate dispatch, NOT measured native selector cost. Native trials time the
  actual confidence selector plus wrapper/clock boundary overhead.
- expansion_cpu_ns: boundary3 - boundary2, including wrapper/clock overhead.
- local_total_cpu_ns: boundary3 - boundary1; must equal the sum of those intervals.
No overhead is automatically subtracted. Detailed printing/counters happen in a
separate fresh audit process whose results must match the timing-only process.
Audit CPU includes logging and is labelled accordingly; a difference between two
single runs is not a reliable estimate of counter overhead.

Ten consecutive three-clock probes per process record clock/bridge/binding costs.
They are local diagnostics, not a complete measurement-overhead calibration.
Embedded Python reported 3.12.3, monotonic process clock and nominal resolution
1e-9 seconds. In the 36 timing-only processes, individual probe intervals ranged
from 2751 to 34779 ns (median 4603 ns). These are observed probe samples only.
Startup, module loading, snapshot preparation, parent-Python CPU, offline checks
and final output printing are excluded from these local intervals. They must be
accounted for as appropriate in the later total-query benchmark. This harness
does NOT yet measure total-query CPU, impose CPU deadlines, or estimate route cost.

Work counters and observed mechanism
The audit logs each visited belief's stamp-disjoint result, forward/backward
binary rule dispatch, unary dispatch and each generated result. A dispatch means
one call to native |-, not the number of individual rule clauses tested inside it.
Stamp-disjoint means evidence-eligible; it does not imply successful rule matching.
Offline accounting records unique generated records, new beliefs before caps,
retained task/belief additions, and task/belief removals due to caps. Native queue
results are also checked against independently reconstructed dedup/removal order.

Canonical initial states:
Width   Beliefs scanned by EACH candidate   A results   B results
1       6                                  1           1
4       12                                 1           4
16      36                                 1           16
The extra result-generation mechanism is therefore observed, not merely drawn in
a diagram. Eleven validation trials generated at least one record already in the
belief queue; deduplication matters too. These counts are not CPU cost estimates.

Timing limitations demonstrated by the control
Single expansion measurements across the batch range from about 0.113 to 1.632 ms.
In canonical N1, A measured 0.130 ms and B 0.210 ms despite the same reported work
counts. This is a warning against using isolated timings to assign cheap/expensive
labels: cold-runtime effects and measurement/run variability are uncontrolled.
No timing ratio, statistical significance, generalization or route-speed claim is
accepted from this batch. Step six must calibrate clocks/warm-up/overhead, randomize
paired order, restore before EACH measured alternative, and repeat across states.

Trimming diagnostic
The extra diagnostic-trim-cap2 trial copies the smallest initial state and sets
both queue-limit arguments to 2 (native keeps length strictly below 2). This
instrumentation-only test removed 5 task records and 6 belief records; the newly
generated certificate was not retained. Reference/timed/audit queues all agree.
The actual qualification cases retain their original 4097 arguments. This
diagnostic does not belong to the A/B cost comparison or redefine task success.

Failure retained and fixed
run001 stopped after its first trial because the counter parser expected capital
True/False while PeTTa prints lowercase true/false. Its native/timed outputs were
retained. The parser was fixed and a regression test now reads that exact audit
log. No inference, task, rule, cap or success threshold changed for the rerun.
run002 is the successful complete validation batch.

Review files
src/pln_cost/expansion.py: extraction, clock wrapper, counter parsing/accounting.
scripts/validate_expansion.py: provenance, trial construction and native parity.
tests/test_expansion.py: invalid clocks/candidates, counter regression, saved runs.
results/qualification/step-05/run002/expand.metta: small native-operation helper.
results/qualification/step-05/run002/expand-audit.metta: diagnostic counterpart.
results/qualification/step-05/run002/report.json: all inputs, samples and checks.
Each named trial directory retains input.json, all three MeTTa fixtures, stdout,
stderr and report.json. Source hashes describe files at execution time; the
saved-run regression test and status/docs updates were added afterwards.
Native PLN and PeTTa source repositories remain unchanged. Copies include MIT
license attribution. The successful batch occupies approximately 2.1 MB.

Validation performed
  python3 -m unittest discover -s tests -q
  49 tests passed before run002; 50 passed after adding saved-run regression.
  python3 scripts/validate_expansion.py --run-id run002
  36 passed instrumentation validations / 108 clean engine executions.
No repeated cost-gap experiment, cost estimator or main benchmark was implemented.

Next review-gated step
Design and calibrate paired repeated CPU measurements before interpreting a cost
gap. Predeclare repetition counts, practical effect/noise criteria, warm-up,
randomization, and batching rules. Preserve the N1 control and all measured
negative/equal outcomes. Compare candidates from identical restored states and
keep restoration/measurement overhead visible. Do not choose an estimator yet.

Suggested commit message
Validate native PLN expansion CPU timing and work counters
