STEP ONE: SMALL EXAMPLE AND PYTHON-PLN INTERFACE
2026-10-04. Complete within the stated interface/input-check scope; stop for review.

What was implemented
- A small package under src/pln_cost, with separate runtime, world and output checks.
- A MeTTa fixture containing the actual PLN input, without evaluator target labels.
- A standard-library Python entry point and offline unit tests.
- Explicit external runtime configuration with pinned source commits.
- New-directory-only result recording, raw stdout/stderr and source hashes.
There is no estimator, learned policy, relevance extension, proof replay extension,
query CPU instrumentation or performance benchmark in this step.

Runtime decision
The existing step-03 Python environment does not discover installed petta or
janus_swi modules. The pinned PeTTa source does contain an embedding interface,
but using it would require further dependency work. Step one uses Python's
subprocess API to invoke the already installed SWI/PeTTa engine with unmodified
PLN. This validates that interface, not hyperon.MeTTa() or embedded PeTTa().

Reproduce the environment observation (from the parent workspace)
  research-discovery/step-03/runtime/venv/bin/python -c 'import importlib.util; print(importlib.util.find_spec("petta"), importlib.util.find_spec("janus_swi"))'
Observed: None None. No packages were installed in this step.

Executed runtime checks: results/step-01/run001/report.json
1. Run the upstream DeductionRevision.metta unchanged, including its own assertion.
   Its expected strength 0.125, confidence 0.30429942952553224 and evidence
   (1 2 3 4) matched. One native assertion passed.
2. Run the same native knowledge base through our direct local-library preload
   path; replace imports/assertion with an explicitly marked query result.
   It returned the same strength, confidence and evidence within 1e-12 numeric
   tolerance. The generated parity fixture is preserved with the raw output.
3. Run cases/machine_failure.metta with the same pinned library and native
   confidence priority, all native inference rules and query parameters 100/30/100.
   Returned strength:   0.6879979916209911
   Returned confidence: 0.679015635981946
   Returned evidence:   (1 2 3 4)
   Independent world target: 0.74 (exactly 37/50)
   Squared probability error: 0.002704208875450514
All three processes exited cleanly with empty stderr; neither source checkout
changed. This is one illustrative query, not a distribution of performance results.

Input and output validation
The Python evaluator enumerates all 16 assignments from the declared joint world.
Tests verify normalization, marginals, conditional inputs and target using exact
fractions. A separate test checks the actual MeTTa fixture strengths against those
world conditionals; its 0.9 confidences remain an explicit controlled setting.
Output tests reject absent/duplicate/malformed answer markers, nonfinite or out-of-
range values and invalid evidence identifiers. Zero process exit alone is not
treated as a successful query. Evidence-shape validation is not proof validation.
Six offline tests passed; their captured output is unit-tests.txt in run001.

Interpretation and limits
The observed answer agrees numerically with the earlier analytic revision of the
two candidate estimates. We have not independently replayed the full new native
trajectory, so this agreement is not a verified causal account of every inference.
The proxy route intentionally violates a screening assumption; this is a semantic
stress fixture. The 0.74 target is not a claim that the native query must return
0.74. Higher confidence does not substitute for lower forecast error.

Each process has a wall timeout and stack limit for bounded correctness execution.
No speed claim is made. Actual query CPU, Python/engine total accounting, hardware
cost variation, repeated timing and deadline eligibility remain later work.
The existing relevance adapter and independent checker have not been extended.
The script preserves native query caps rather than interpreting maxsteps as CPU.
This project depends on local external source/runtime directories named in config;
it is not yet a self-contained installer or portable benchmark package.

Recommended code-review order
1. cases/machine_failure.metta: what PLN actually receives and which query runs.
2. src/pln_cost/world.py: where the independent target comes from.
3. src/pln_cost/runtime.py: source verification and Python-to-engine boundary.
4. scripts/validate_step1.py: execution order, checks and retained results.
5. src/pln_cost/validation.py and tests/test_step1.py: what passes/fails and what
   these checks explicitly do not establish.

Next action: user code/results review. No automatic continuation to the next step.
